Judo (Japanese: 柔道, Hepburn: Jūdō, lit. 'gentle way') is an unarmed modern Japanese martial art, combat sport, Olympic sport (since 1964), and the most prominent form of jacket wrestling competed internationally.[3][4][5] Judo was created in 1882 by Kanō Jigorō (嘉納 治五郎) as an eclectic martial art, distinguishing itself from its predecessors (primarily Tenjin Shinyo-ryu jujutsu and Kitō-ryū jujutsu) due to an emphasis on "randori" (乱取り, lit. 'free sparring') instead of kata (形, kata, pre-arranged forms) alongside its removal of striking and weapon training elements.[3][4][6] Judo rose to prominence for its dominance over established jujutsu schools in tournaments hosted by the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department (警視庁武術大会, Keishicho Bujutsu Taikai), resulting in its adoption as the department's primary martial art.[4][3] A judo practitioner is called a "judoka" (柔道家, jūdōka, lit. 'judo performer'), and the judo uniform is called "judogi" (柔道着, jūdōgi, lit. 'judo attire').

The objective of competitive judo is to throw an opponent, immobilize them with a pin, or force an opponent to submit with a joint lock or a choke. While strikes and use of weapons are included in some pre-arranged forms (kata), they are not frequently trained and are illegal in judo competition or free practice.[4] Judo's international governing body is the International Judo Federation, and competitors compete in the international IJF professional circuit.

Judo's philosophy revolves around two primary principles: "Seiryoku-Zenyo" (精力善用, lit. 'good use of energy') and "Jita-Kyoei" (自他共栄, lit. 'mutual welfare and benefit').[4][7][8][9][10] The philosophy and subsequent pedagogy developed for judo became the model for other modern Japanese martial arts that developed from Ko-ryū. Judo also spawned a number of derivative martial arts around the world, such as Brazilian jiu-jitsu, Krav Maga, sambo, and ARB. Judo also influenced other combat styles such as close-quarters combat (CQC), mixed martial arts (MMA), shoot wrestling and submission wrestling.

The early history of judo is inseparable from its founder, Japanese polymath and educator Kanō Jigorō (嘉納 治五郎, Jigoro Kano, 1860–1938), born Shinnosuke Jigorō (新之助 治五郎, Jigorō Shinnosuke). Kano was born into a relatively affluent family. His father, Jirosaku, was the second son of the head priest of the Shinto Hiyoshi shrine in Shiga Prefecture. He married Sadako Kano, daughter of the owner of Kiku-Masamune sake brewing company and was adopted by the family, changing his name to Kano. He ultimately became an official in the Shogunate government.[11]

The Eisho-ji dōjō was originally shoin. It was a relatively small affair, consisting of a 12 jo[21] (214 sq ft) training area. Kano took in resident and non-resident students, the first two being Tomita Tsunejirō and Shiro Saigo.[22] In August, the following year, the pair were granted shodan (初段, first rank) grades, the first that had been awarded in any martial art.[23]

Kano believed that "jūjutsu" was insufficient to describe his art: although jutsu (術) means "art" or "means", it implies a method consisting of a collection of physical techniques. Accordingly, he changed the second character to dō (道), meaning "way", "road" or "path", which implies a more philosophical context than jutsu and has a common origin with the Chinese concept of tao. Thus Kano renamed it Jūdō (柔道, judo).[27]

There are three basic categories of waza (技, techniques) in judo: nage-waza (投げ技, throwing techniques), katame-waza (固技, grappling techniques) and atemi-waza (当て身技, striking techniques).[28] Judo is mostly known for nage-waza and katame-waza.[29]

Judo practitioners typically devote a portion of each practice session to ukemi (受け身, break-falls), in order that nage-waza can be practiced without significant risk of injury. Several distinct types of ukemi exist, including ushiro ukemi (後ろ受身, rear breakfalls); yoko ukemi (横受け身, side breakfalls); mae ukemi (前受け身, front breakfalls); and zenpo kaiten ukemi (前方回転受身, rolling breakfalls)[30]

Judo pedagogy emphasizes randori (乱取り, literally "taking chaos", but meaning "free practice"). This term covers a variety of forms of practice, and the intensity at which it is carried out varies depending on intent and the level of expertise of the participants. At one extreme, is a compliant style of randori, known as Yakusoku geiko (約束稽古, prearranged practice), in which neither participant offers resistance to their partner's attempts to throw. A related concept is that of Sute geiko (捨稽古, throw-away practice), in which an experienced judoka allows himself to be thrown by his less-experienced partner.[44] At the opposite extreme from yakusoku geiko is the hard style of randori that seeks to emulate the style of judo seen in competition. While hard randori is the cornerstone of judo, over-emphasis of the competitive aspect is seen as undesirable by traditionalists if the intent of the randori is to "win" rather than to learn.[45]

Contest (試合, shiai) is a vitally important aspect of judo. In 1899, Kano was asked to chair a committee of the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai to draw up the first formal set of contest rules for jujutsu. These rules were intended to cover contests between different various traditional schools of jujutsu as well as practitioners of Kodokan judo. Contests were 15 minutes long and were judged on the basis of nage waza and katame waza, excluding atemi waza. Wins were by two ippons, awarded in every four-main different path of winning alternatives, by "Throwing", where the opponent's back strikes flat onto the mat with sufficient force, by "Pinning" them on their back for a "sufficient" amount of time, or by "Submission", which could be achieved via Shime-waza or Kansetsu-waza, in which the opponent was forced to give himself or herself up or summon a referee's or corner-judge's stoppage. Finger, toe and ankle locks were prohibited.[64] In 1900, these rules were adopted by the Kodokan with amendments made to prohibit all joint locks for kyu grades and added wrist locks to the prohibited kansetsu-waza for dan grades. It was also stated that the ratio of tachi-waza to ne-waza should be between 70% and 80% for kyu grades and between 60% and 70% for dan grades.[64]

Jigoro Kano for a long time wished to see judo as an Olympic discipline.[66] The first time judo was seen in the Olympic Games was in an informal demonstration hosted by Kano at the 1932 Games.[67] However, Kano was ambivalent about judo's potential inclusion as an Olympic sport:

I have been asked by people of various sections as to the wisdom and possibility of judo being introduced with other games and sports at the Olympic Games. My view on the matter, at present, is rather passive. If it be the desire of other member countries, I have no objection. But I do not feel inclined to take any initiative. For one thing, judo in reality is not a mere sport or game. I regard it as a principle of life, art and science. In fact, it is a means for personal cultural attainment. Only one of the forms of judo training, so-called randori or free practice can be classed as a form of sport. Certainly, to some extent, the same may be said of boxing and fencing, but today they are practiced and conducted as sports. Then the Olympic Games are so strongly flavored with nationalism that it is possible to be influenced by it and to develop "Contest Judo", a retrograde form as ju-jitsu was before the Kodokan was founded. Judo should be free as art and science from any external influences, political, national, racial, and financial or any other organized interest. And all things connected with it should be directed to its ultimate object, the "Benefit of Humanity". Human sacrifice is a matter of ancient history.[68]
At the 57th general session of the International Olympic Committee, held in Rome on 22 August 1960, the IOC members formally decided to include Judo among the events to be contested at the Olympic Games. The proposal, which was placed before the session by the Japanese delegation, was welcomed by all participants. The few who opposed had nothing against Judo itself but against increasing the number of Olympic events as a whole. There were only two dissenting votes in the final poll. For the first time in history a traditional Japanese sport has been included in the Olympic competition.[69]

Finally, judo was first contested as an Olympic sport for men in the 1964 Games in Tokyo. The Olympic Committee initially dropped judo for the 1968 Olympics, meeting protests.[70] Dutchman Anton Geesink won the first Olympic gold medal in the open division of judo by defeating Akio Kaminaga of Japan. The women's event was introduced at the Olympics in 1988 as a demonstration event, and an official medal event in 1992.

Judo was introduced as a Paralympic sport at the 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul, with women's events contested for the first time at 2004 Summer Paralympics.

Judo was an optional sport included in the three editions of the Commonwealth Games: 1990 Commonwealth Games in Auckland, 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester and 2014 Commonwealth Games in  Glasgow. From 2022, judo will become a core sport in the 22nd edition of the Commonwealth Games, in Birmingham.

A throw that places the opponent on their back with impetus and control scores an ippon (一本), winning the contest.[72] A lesser throw, where the opponent is thrown onto his back, but with insufficient force to merit an ippon, scores a waza-ari (技あり).[72] Two scores of waza-ari equal an ippon waza-ari awasete ippon (技あり合わせて一本,  ). This rule was cancelled in 2017, but it was resumed in 2018. Formerly, a throw that places the opponent onto his side scores a yuko (有効).[72]

In 2017, the International Judo Federation announced changes in evaluation of points. There will only be ippon and waza-ari scores given during a match with yuko scores now included within waza-ari.[73]

If the scores are identical at the end of the match, the contest is resolved by the Golden Score rule. Golden Score is a sudden death situation where the clock is reset to match-time, and the first contestant to achieve any score wins. If there is no score during this period, then the winner is decided by Hantei (判定), the majority opinion of the referee and the two corner judges.[76]

Two types of penalties may be awarded. A shido (指導 –  literally "guidance") is awarded for minor rule infringements. A shido can also be awarded for a prolonged period of non-aggression. Recent rule changes allow for the first shidos to result in only warnings. If there is a tie, then and only then, will the number of shidos (if less than three) be used to determine the winner. After three shidos are given, the victory is given to the opponent, constituting an indirect hansoku-make (反則負け –  literally "foul-play defeat"), but does not result in expulsion from the tournament. Note: Prior to 2017, the 4th shido was hansoku-make. If hansoku-make is awarded for a major rule infringement, it results not just in loss of the match, but in the expulsion from the tournament of the penalized player.

Kano Jigoro's Kodokan judo is the most popular and well-known style of judo, but is not the only one. The terms judo and jujutsu were quite interchangeable in the early years, so some of these forms of judo are still known as jujutsu or jiu-jitsu either for that reason, or simply to differentiate them from mainstream judo. From Kano's original style of judo, several related forms have evolved—some now widely considered to be distinct arts:

Commonly described as a separate style of Judo, Kosen judo is a competition rules set of Kodokan judo that was popularized in the early 20th century for use in Japanese Special High Schools Championships held at Kyoto Imperial University.[82] The word "Kosen" is an acronym of Koto Senmon Gakko (高等専門学校, literally "Higher Professional School"). Currently, competitions are organized between Japan's seven former Imperial Universities and referred to as Nanatei Judo (ja:七帝柔道, literally "Seven Emperors Judo"). Kosen judo's focus on newaza has drawn comparisons with Brazilian jiu-jitsu.

Freestyle Judo is a form of competitive judo practiced primarily in the United States that retains techniques that have been removed from mainstream IJF rules.[83] Freestyle Judo is currently backed by the International Freestyle Judo Alliance (IFJA). The Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) officially sanctions Freestyle Judo in the United States of America.[84]

Georgian Judo is influenced by Chidaoba (Georgian cultural jacket wrestling). Chidaoba's major influence on the Georgian style of judo is in its unorthodox grips as well as its throws and takedowns. Georgian Judo is also known for its countering techniques through the use of power moves such as bear hugs and double underhooks into throws and takedowns.[85][86] It is represented by various olympic winners and World Champions, such as Lasha Bekauri, Lukhumi Chkhvimiani, Shota Chochishvili, Tato Grigalashvili, Zaza Kedelashvili, David Khakhaleishvili, Luka Maisuradze,Lasha Shavdatuashvili and others.

Unlike other Far East styles of Judo, Mongolian Judo focuses much more on power rather than technique. The influence of Bokh on Mongolian Judo can be seen in its grips and body positioning. Judo grips such as the over under, double underhooks and the heavy use of grips on the belt.[89][90] It is represented by various world champions, such as Khaliuny Boldbaatar, Tsendiin Damdin, Boldyn Gankhaich, Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar, Mönkhbatyn Urantsetseg, Ganbatyn Boldbaatar.

Korean Judo is also very technical but what really separates it from other styles is the speed at which its techniques are performed. Korean Judo it is not powerful in terms of using strength but instead, the practitioners use speed, movement and technique in order to create fast and powerful snaps. This styles produced various olympic champions, like Ahn Byeong-keun, Cho Min-sun, Choi Min-ho, Ha Hyung-joo, Jeon Ki-young, Kim Jae-bum, Kim Jae-yup, Lee Kyung-keun, Lee Won-hee, Song Dae-nam and others.[91][92]

French Judo is based on tactical Kumi Kata and focuses on breaking the posture of the opponent as well as preventing opponents from attaining a proper grip. This style does not use a huge amount of power, it prefer to use technique, tactics and timing.[93][94] Many French judo practitioners have become World and Olympic champions, like Clarisse Agbegnenou, Émilie Andéol, Marc Alexandre, Djamel Bouras, Amandine Buchard, Guillaume Chaine, Axel Clerget, Sarah-Léonie Cysique, Lucie Décosse, Romane Dicko, David Douillet, Catherine Fleury-Vachon, Alexandre Iddir and many others.

Cuban Judo is characterized by an explosive and high athletic style that puts an emphasis on body conditioning and calculated planning mixed with raw power.
In terms of training the athletes use a particularly methodical and intellectual approach to the sport.[95][96]

Judo in Azerbaijan has developed over the years and has become deep rooted and considered a top sport in the country.
It's very similar to Georgian Judo, as its mostly focused on the practitioner's strength during throws.
It's a hybrid of the original Kodokan Judo and the traditional Azerbaijan style of wrestling called Azeri, whose techniques consist of unorthodox grips and positioning during counter-attacks.[97][98]

Judo has become a top sport in Israel only recently.
Israeli Judo is characterized by a particular emphasis on hip throws, which are executed with a mix of technique and aggression, with the practitioner that has to adjust his sleeves before powerfully gripping and throwing the opponent away.[99][100]

Sambo is influenced by judo combined with wrestling techniques, and striking in case of combat sambo. Vasili Oshchepkov was one of the first European judo black belts under Kano. Oshchepkov went on to contribute his knowledge of judo as one of the three founders of Sambo, which also integrated various international and Soviet bloc wrestling styles and other combative techniques. Oshchepkov was executed during the political purges of 1937 and judo was banned for decades until its inclusion in the 1964 Olympics, where sambists won 4 bronze medals.[101] In their History of Sambo, Brett Jacques and Scott Anderson wrote that in Russia "judo and SOMBO were considered to be the same thing"—albeit with a different uniform and some differences in the rules.[102]

Judo also influenced other combat styles such as close-quarters combat (CQC), mixed martial arts (MMA), shoot wrestling and submission wrestling.

Kano's vision for judo was one of a martial way that could be practiced realistically. Randori (free practice) was a central part of judo pedagogy and shiai (competition) a crucial test of a judoka's understanding of judo.[107] Safety necessitated some basic innovations that shaped judo's development. Atemi waza (striking techniques) were entirely limited to kata (prearranged forms) early in judo's history. Kansetsu waza (joint manipulation techniques) were limited to techniques that focused on the elbow joint. Various throwing techniques that were judged to be too dangerous to practice safely at full force, such as all joint-locking throws from Jujutsu, were also prohibited in shiai. To maximise safety in nage waza (throwing techniques), judoka trained in ukemi (break falls) and practiced on tatami (rice straw mats).[citation needed]

Mental training is an emerging modality of training in judo that aims to improve the performance of high-performance athletes in training and competition and also to promote health and well-being in the daily life of athletes and their entourage through the learning and application of psychological skills. The first publication of a judo-specific practical mental training approach based on sports training principles was in 2005 with the work of Boris Blumenstein, Ronnie Lidor and Gershon Tenenbaum.[108] In 2022, Caio Gabriel published the first article on mental training that appeared in the scientific journal of the International Judo Federation, "The Arts and Sciences of Judo".[109]

Judo practitioners traditionally wear white uniforms called 稽古着 (keikogi, keikogi) practice clothing or jūdōgi (柔道着, judogi, judo clothing)[112] sometimes abbreviated in the west as "gi". It comprises a heavy cotton kimono-like jacket called an uwagi (上衣, jacket), similar to traditional hanten (半纏, workers' jackets) fastened by an obi (帯, obi, belt), coloured to indicate rank, and cotton draw-string zubon (ズボン, trousers).[113] Early examples of keikogi had short sleeves and trouser legs and the modern long-sleeved judogi was adopted in 1906.[114]

The modern use of the blue judogi for high level competition was first suggested by Anton Geesink at the 1986 Maastricht IJF DC Meeting.[115] For competition, a blue judogi is worn by one of the two competitors for ease of distinction by judges, referees, and spectators. In Japan, both judoka use a white judogi and the traditional red obi (based on the colors of the Japanese flag) is affixed to the belt of one competitor. Outside Japan, a colored obi may also be used for convenience in minor competitions, the blue judogi only being mandatory at the regional or higher levels, depending on organization. Japanese practitioners and traditionalists tend to look down on the use of blue because judo is considered a pure sport, and replacing the pure white judogi with the impure blue is an offense.[115]

The international governing body for judo is the International Judo Federation (IJF), founded in 1951. Members of the IJF include the African Judo Union (AJU), the Pan-American Judo Confederation (PJC), the Judo Union of Asia (JUA), the European Judo Union (EJU) and the Oceania Judo Union (OJU), each comprising a number of national judo associations. The IJF is responsible for organising international competition and hosts the World Judo Championships and is involved in running the Olympic Judo events.[117]

Judo is a hierarchical art, where seniority of judoka is designated by what is known as the kyū (級, kyū) -dan (段, dan) ranking system. This system was developed by Jigoro Kano and was based on the ranking system in the board game Go.[118]

The highest black belt ranks  have no formal requirements and are decided by the president of the Kodokan. Kano Jigoro's grandson Kano Yukimitsu served as the fourth president from 1980 until 2009. As an educator by profession, Kanō believed that there should be no end to an individual's learning, and therefore no limit to the number of dan ranks. As of 2011, fifteen Japanese men have been promoted to jūdan (十段, 10th dan) by the Kodokan;[119] the IJF and Western and Asian national federations have promoted another eleven who are not recognized at that level of rank by the Kodokan. On 28 July 2011, the promotion board of USA Judo awarded Keiko Fukuda the rank of 10th dan, who was the first woman to be promoted to judo's highest level, albeit not a Kodokan-recognized rank.

On October 28 of every year, the judo community celebrates the World Judo Day in the honor of the birth of Judo's founder, Jigoro Kano. The theme of the World Judo Day changes from year to year, but the goal is always to highlight the moral values of Judo. The first celebration was held in 2011.[121] Past themes for the celebration have included:
