Obstacle course racing (OCR) is a sport in which a competitor, traveling on foot, must overcome various physical challenges in the form of obstacles. Races vary in length from courses with obstacles close together to events of several kilometers[1] which incorporate elements of track, road and/or cross country/trail running. Courses may include climbing over walls or up ropes, monkey bars, carrying heavy objects, traversing bodies of water or mud, crawling under barbed wire, and jumping through fire.[2][3]
Since the beginning of modern OCR in 1987, the sport has grown in popularity such that more than 2500 events are held annually across the world[4] and several run organizing companies are commercially successful.[5]

The concept of using obstacles for competition has been in use since the 1800s, including the 200m Obstacle Swim at the 1900 Summer Olympic Games in Paris, with the first formal land-based races in the Obstacle Run[6] of Military Pentathlon, first held at the Military Physical Training Centre, at Freiburg, in the French occupation zone in Germany, in August 1947. Only Belgian, Dutch, and French teams took part in the competition. Since 1950, annual world championships have been held. The sport has grown in popularity, and now over 138 countries participate in the World Military Games.[7] The sport's governing body, the International Military Sports Council (CISM), now also organise pentathlons aimed at naval and air force personnel.

Spartan Race founder Joe Desena set a goal to take the sport to the Olympics and tapped event and television producer Ian Adamson for the task in 2014. He subsequently founded the international sporting federation, now known as World Obstacle,[16] the Fédération Internationale de Sport d’Obstacles (FISO), based in Lausanne, Switzerland.[17] World Obstacle is a non-profit, member-based sporting organization and the sole world governing body for Obstacle Course Racing. As of 2022, World Obstacle had national member federations in 115 countries in four continental regions (Africa, Americas, Asia-Pacific, and Europe), the largest number being in Europe.[18] World Obstacle applied for membership of GAISF in 2017, with a goal of having obstacle course racing and related disciplines recognized as an international sport by the International Olympic Committee.

It has been noted that World Obstacle has no member race organizations. As a not-for-profit sporting federation the only members of World Obstacle are national federations (national governing bodies.) The members of the national federations are athletes and athlete-based organizations. Brands and for-profit corporations are not members of sporting federations but can be recognized or aligned under certain circumstances.

Full medal events for OCR were included for the first time in an International Multisport Games in the 2019 South East Asia Games. Medal events were approved for 100 m, 400 m, and 5 km distances.[21] The SEA Games are under the regulation of the Southeast Asian Games Federation (SEAGF) with supervision by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the Olympic Council of Asia (OCA).

The sport disciplines of Ninja (modeled after the Japanese television series Sasuke and international adaptations such as American Ninja Warrior) and OCR became self-governing sub-sports of World Obstacle in 2020,[22] in a model similar to Aquatics. The first non-commercial (Federation) Ninja World Championships were held in Moscow, Russia in the 2019 Ninja World Championships.

The self-named independent World Championship is an event owned and operated by Adventurey, a Brooklyn NY marketing and branding company.[50] The first race took place on October 25 & 26, 2014 in Cincinnati, Ohio. The men's event was won by UK's Jonathan Albon,[51] who successfully defended his crown in 2015[52] and 2016.[53] and every consecutive year through the current 2019 season. For the women, the inaugural event was won by Siri Englund of Sweden in 2014[54] and then Lindsay Webster of Canada in 2015[55] and 2016.[56] With participation of the sport growing, the organization added a 3 km course and a team event in 2016.
